Browser events definition (#2)
scheler/opentelemetry-specification: specification/logs/events/semantic_conventions/browser.md

# Semantic conventions for browser events

**Status**: [Experimental](../../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>
<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Page View](#page-view)
- [Ajax](#ajax)
- [Exception](#exception)
- [UserAction](#useraction)
- [PageNavigationTiming](#pagenavigationtiming)
- [AjaxTiming](#ajaxtiming)
- [ResourceTiming](#resourcetiming)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

This document describes the semantic conventions for browser events. The events may be represented either as Span Events or Log Events.

> All events have the following three high-level attributes. The domain has a fixed value of `browser`. The event name is specified at the beginning of each section below. The payload of the event goes in an attribute called `event.data` and the fields described below for each event go into this attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All events have the following three high-level attributes. The event name is specified at the beginning of each section below. The payload of the event goes in a nested attribute called `event.data`. `event.data' for each event is listed below.
```

> All events have the following three high-level attributes. The domain has a fixed value of `browser`. The event name is specified at the beginning of each section below. The payload of the event goes in an attribute called `event.data` and the fields described below for each event go into this attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All events have the following three high-level attributes. The event name is specified at the beginning of each section below. The payload of the event goes in a nested attribute called `event.data`. `event.data' for each event is listed below.
```

| Key  | Value | Description  |
|---|---|---|
| `event.domain` | browser | Fixed value |

> | `event.name` | | Described in each section below|

Reviewer: I think if we can keep this table format consistent with the other tables, it will be great.

| `event.data` | | A map of key/value pairs, with the keys for each event described in following sections|

> ## Page View

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PageView
```

<!-- semconv browser.page_view -->
The event name MUST be `page_view`.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |

> |---|---|---|---|---|

Reviewer: missing fields: title, userconsent, consentdetails, enduser.id'

Author: @ramthi @MSNev 
- Added title
- Can you tell me the type, a brief description and an example for consentdetails?
- enduser.id is added to ResourceVarying since its common to all events, and can change in the same instance of a  Single Page Application

Author: Also, does userconsent require customer to hook the user consent response to the instrumentation library somehow? How is this information captured by the instrumentation library?

Reviewer 2: For Microsoft this is a JSON encoded string, where the format is controlled by another team that manages consent. I don't have any example

Reviewer 2: The user consent is a field that the application populates based on an additional SDK (for Microsoft anyway)

Author: Removing userconsent and consentdetails as these will have to added as custom attributes, since they cannot be added by auto-instrumentation.  @ramthi - this is based on discussion with @MSNev .

> | `referrer` | string | Referrer URL for the browser page (`document.referrer`) | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page` | Recommended |

Reviewer: The description does not match what we have in the doc.

It should be something like this "referring page Uri. Can be blank when there is no referrer"

Author: I've updated the description. The OpenTelemetry convention is that this attribute/field should not be present when blank.

| `type` | int | Browser page type | `0` | Required |
| `user_consent` | boolean | Whether or not user provided consent on the page (consent for what?) |  | Recommended |

> | [`http.url`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page`; `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#foo` | Required |

Reviewer: I'm confused why you decided to pluck out this field (which is actually defined in varying attribute as browser.page.url) and add it here!

Author: This is required for a http span

> **[1]:** The URL fragment may be included for virtual pages

Reviewer: Can we consider markdown footnote syntax which allows us to link to sections in the page and make discovery of footnotes easier?

`type` MUST be one of the following:

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `0` | physical_page |
| `1` | virtual_page |
<!-- endsemconv -->

> ## Ajax

Reviewer: I think we should use a generic term for this event.  AJAX is a type of remote/outgoing call.  So is fetch.  If we want to represent any remote call with this event it should have a generic name.  My suggestion is OutgoingRequest

Reviewer 3: AJAX is more of a buzzword, XHR (XMLHttpRequest) is the equilevant to fetch you're thinking of. For generic I'd rather go with `HTTPRequest` or just `HTTP`

Reviewer 2: Or OutgoingRequest

Author: My vote is for HTTPRequest

Reviewer 3: Also pointed out by @pkanal during sig: Already existing naming convention for span is `HTTP`: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#name

Author: @t2t2 @pkanal that's a good point.  I will go with `HTTP` for now for this document, although the spec requires it to be `HTTP {method_name}`.  Do we want to continue to use the instrumentation scope's name to identify the span type? if there's anyway to simplify this we can do it now.

<!-- semconv browser.ajax -->
The event name MUST be `ajax`.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |

> |---|---|---|---|---|

Reviewer: Missing fields: http.response_content_length
_uncompressed, http.request.header.<key>, http.response.header.<key>

Author: - Added `http.response_content_length_uncompressed`.
- Added the request and response headers in a separate section for now, due to build_tools not support parameterized attribute name.

Author: For the headers, please see the notes. Due to sensitive information in the headers, the spec requires the instrumentation to explicitly configure which headers to include. Do we know what is a safe list of the headers?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/microsoft/ApplicationInsights-JS/blob/master/extensions/applicationinsights-dependencies-js/src/ajax.ts#L261-L263

Reviewer 2: The X-API-Key is specific to Application Insights

> | `page.url` | string | The URL of the page that made the Ajax call | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page` | Recommended |

Reviewer: Same as above.  why is this field not in resource?

Author: moved it to ResourceVarying.

> | `type` | int | Ajax request type | `0` | Required |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `type` | int | Outgoing request type | `0;1` | Required |
```

| [`http.method`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | string | HTTP request method. | `GET`; `POST`; `HEAD` | Required |
| [`http.request_content_length`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | int | The size of the request payload body in bytes. This is the number of bytes transferred excluding headers and is often, but not always, present as the [Content-Length](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#field.content-length) header. For requests using transport encoding, this should be the compressed size. | `3495` | Recommended |
| [`http.response_content_length`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | int | The size of the response payload body in bytes. This is the number of bytes transferred excluding headers and is often, but not always, present as the [Content-Length](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#field.content-length) header. For requests using transport encoding, this should be the compressed size. | `3495` | Recommended |

> | [`http.status_code`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | int | [HTTP response status code](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6). | `200` | Conditionally Required: If and only if one was received/sent. |

Reviewer: I dont understand the conditionally required part.  What scenario results in statuscode to be null?  If there is a valid scenario then this field is optional.  The conditionally required is just confusing IMO.

Reviewer 3: It would clarify the behavior in case of timeout or network error (which would have status code 0), also CORS requests that fail CORS rules (eg. a.example.com -> b.example.com without response having correct CORS headers) can have status code 0

> | [`http.url`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://www.foo.bar/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | Required |

Reviewer: Again, this description does not match what we discussed and captured in the word doc.!

**[1]:** `http.url` MUST NOT contain credentials passed via URL in form of `https://username:password@www.example.com/`. In such case the attribute's value should be `https://www.example.com/`.

`type` MUST be one of the following:

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `0` | fetch |
| `1` | xhr |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Exception

<!-- semconv browser.exception -->
The event name MUST be `exception`.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|

> | `file_name` | string | Name of the file that generated the error | `foo.js` | Recommended |

Reviewer: Field name has an extra _. what is the thinking here?  Again differs from what is captured in the word doc.

Author: The yaml to md conversion tool did not allow camel cased attribute names, hence used the underscore equivalent. Let's discuss which format we want to use.

Reviewer 3: Could also extend the already existing convention seen in other fields, making it `exception.file`, `exception.line`, `exception.column`

Author: Added the exception prefix.

> | `line_number` | int | Name of the file that generated the error |  | Recommended |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `line_number` | int | Line number where the error occurred |  | Recommended |
```

> | `column_number` | int | Name of the file that generated the error |  | Recommended |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `column_number` | int | Column number where the error occurred |  | Recommended |
```

| `exception.message` | string | The exception message. | `Division by zero`; `Can't convert 'int' object to str implicitly` | Recommended |

> | `exception.stacktrace` | string | A stacktrace as a string in the natural representation for the language runtime. The representation is to be determined and documented by each language SIG. | `Exception in thread "main" java.lang.RuntimeException: Test exception\n at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodB(GenerateTrace.java:13)\n at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodA(GenerateTrace.java:9)\n at com.example.GenerateTrace.main(GenerateTrace.java:5)` | Recommended |

Reviewer: This description is a generic one.  Given this is going to be in browser, I recommend we write a desc that is for browsers.

> | `exception.type` | string | The type of the exception (its fully-qualified class name, if applicable). The dynamic type of the exception should be preferred over the static type in languages that support it. | `java.net.ConnectException`; `OSError` | Recommended |

Reviewer: Same here.  Description should be for JavaScript. Same with example...we want to use JavaScript examples.

<!-- endsemconv -->

## UserAction

<!-- semconv browser.user_action -->

> The event name MUST be `user_action`.

Reviewer: Not the agreed upon name.  It should be useraction

Author: there's a benefit to using underscores for separating words - tools can be built to convert them into various other forms in the documentation. User Action, for example.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `element` | string | Target element tag name (obtained via `event.target.tagName`) | `button` | Recommended |
| `element_xpath` | string | Target element xpath | `//*[@id="testBtn"]` | Recommended |
| `type` | string | Type of interaction. See enum [here](https://github.com/microsoft/ApplicationInsights-JS/blob/941ec2e4dbd017b8450f2b17c60088ead1e6c428/extensions/applicationinsights-clickanalytics-js/src/Enums.ts) | `clickleft` | Recommended |

> | `click_coordinates` | string | Click coordinates captured as a string in the format {x}X{y}.  Eg. 345X23 | `345X23` | Recommended |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `click_coordinates` | string | Click coordinates captured as a string in the format {x}X{y}. | `345X23` | Recommended |
```

> | `tags` | string[] | Grab data from data-otel-* attributes in tree | `[data-otel-asd="value" -> asd attr w/ "value"]` | Recommended |

Reviewer: This example is not clear how the values will be captured/represented.  Are we saying this will be collection of kvp?

**[7]:** MUST be the same for all instances of horizontally scaled services. If the value was not specified, SDKs MUST fallback to `unknown_service:` concatenated with [`process.executable.name`](process.md#process), e.g. `unknown_service:bash`. If `process.executable.name` is not available, the value MUST be set to `unknown_service`.
<!-- endsemconv -->

## ResourceVarying

<!-- semconv browser.resource_varying -->
The event name MUST be `BrowserResourceVarying`.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `browser.screen_width` | int | Window width |  | Recommended |

> | `screen_height` | int | Window height |  | Recommended |

Reviewer 3: Should add clarity on what is meant by window, is it including browser chroma or more likely just the usable region:

![outerHeight vs innerHeight](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/innerHeight/firefoxinnervsouterheight2.png)
[Image via MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/innerHeight#graphical_example)

| `session.id` | string | Session identifier | `Is this a GUID?` | Recommended |
| `browser.page.url` | string | URL of the current active page | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page` | Recommended |
| `browser.page.impression_id` | string | Unique impression id for the page impression, represented by a GUID. Eg: Page.html will yield 4 impression ids if the page is refreshed 4 times in the same browser instance. Could change in SPA usage (when url changes -> new impression) | `GUID` | Recommended |
| [`enduser.id`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md) | string | Username or client_id extracted from the access token or [Authorization](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7235#section-4.2) header in the inbound request from outside the system. [1] | `username` | Recommended |

**[1]:** Authenticated user id
<!-- endsemconv -->

# Events

> The events may be represented either as Span Events or Log Events.

Reviewer 3: > as **Span Events** or Log Events.

Wouldn't it be just spans (eg. for ajax calls), as in going span -> events -> finding event is pointless over-complication

<!-- semconv browser.page_view -->
The event name MUST be `page_view`.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `referrer` | string | Referring Page URI (`document.referrer`) whenever available. | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page` | Recommended |
| `type` | int | Browser page type | `0` | Required |
| `user_consent` | boolean | Whether or not user provided consent on the page (consent for what?) |  | Recommended |
| [`http.url`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page`; `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#foo` | Required |

**[1]:** The URL fragment may be included for virtual pages

`type` MUST be one of the following:

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `0` | physical_page |
| `1` | virtual_page |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Ajax

<!-- semconv browser.ajax -->
The event name MUST be `ajax`.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|

> | `type` | int | Ajax request type | `0` | Required |

Reviewer 3: I feel like instead of type something like `http.client` would be better / more easily generic'd - while in browser you only have `XHR` or `fetch` values, you could also add eg. `OkHttp` for android

| [`http.status_code`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | int | [HTTP response status code](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6). | `200` | Conditionally Required: If and only if one was received/sent. |
| [`http.url`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://www.foo.bar/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | Required |

**[1]:** `http.url` MUST NOT contain credentials passed via URL in form of `https://username:password@www.example.com/`. In such case the attribute's value should be `https://www.example.com/`.

`type` MUST be one of the following:

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `0` | fetch |

> | `1` | xhr |

Reviewer 2: We should also include (or consider)
- sendBeacon
- fetch (with keep alive) [this is an experimental and used by browsers (chromium) for seadBeacon]

Author: Added sendBeacon.

I read about fetch with keep-alive. It looks like keep-alive is an option on the fetch API, so it is not a different http request type but can be an additional item in event.data, say keep_alive: boolean.

Reviewer 2: Correct, the presence of the flag does have implications during page unload as the browser will still attempt to send the request (when this flag is present) but it may be aborted when not. This is used effectively as a replacement for synchronous XHR requests (during unload) if sendBeacon() is not used. Having it as an additional property (value) would work.

| `exception.stacktrace` | string | A stacktrace as a string in the natural representation for the language runtime. The representation is to be determined and documented by each language SIG. | `Exception in thread "main" java.lang.RuntimeException: Test exception\n at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodB(GenerateTrace.java:13)\n at com.example.GenerateTrace.methodA(GenerateTrace.java:9)\n at com.example.GenerateTrace.main(GenerateTrace.java:5)` | Recommended |
| `exception.type` | string | The type of the exception (its fully-qualified class name, if applicable). The dynamic type of the exception should be preferred over the static type in languages that support it. | `java.net.ConnectException`; `OSError` | Recommended |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## UserAction

<!-- semconv browser.user_action -->
The event name MUST be `user_action`.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `element` | string | Target element tag name (obtained via `event.target.tagName`) | `button` | Recommended |
| `element_xpath` | string | Target element xpath | `//*[@id="testBtn"]` | Recommended |

> | `type` | string | Type of interaction. See enum [here](https://github.com/microsoft/ApplicationInsights-JS/blob/941ec2e4dbd017b8450f2b17c60088ead1e6c428/extensions/applicationinsights-clickanalytics-js/src/Enums.ts) | `clickleft` | Recommended |

Reviewer 3: Would be better to use non-vendor list like https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Events#event_listing

Author: We will eventually replace this with an enum of our own based on what gets implemented in the otel instrumentation. I replaced this with an enum having just one value 'click' for now.

# Semantic conventions for browser events

**Status**: [Experimental](../../document-status.md)

<details>
<summary>Table of Contents</summary>
<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Resource](#resource)
  * [Resource](#resource-1)
  * [ResourceVarying](#resourcevarying)
- [Events](#events)
  * [PageView](#pageview)
  * [PageLoad](#pageload)
  * [PageNavigationTiming](#pagenavigationtiming)
  * [ResourceTiming](#resourcetiming)
  * [HTTP](#http)
    + [HTTP request and response headers](#http-request-and-response-headers)
  * [HttpRequestTiming](#httprequesttiming)
  * [Exception](#exception)
  * [UserAction](#useraction)

<!-- tocstop -->

</details>

This document describes the semantic conventions for browser resource and events.

# Resource

## Resource
<!-- semconv browser.resource -->

> The event name MUST be `BrowserResource`.

Reviewer 2: I assume that this is because of the generation from yaml and likewise for `BrowserResourceVarying`, as the current descriptions don't really make sense (because they are not events 😄 )

Author: Removing `type: event` got rid of this sentence.

| Key  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `event.domain` | string | Fixed value: browser ||Required|
| `event.name` | string | Described in each section below||Required|
| `event.data` | map | A map of key/value pairs, with the keys for each event described in following sections||Recommended|

## PageView

<!-- semconv browser.page_view -->
The event name MUST be `page_view`.

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `referrer` | string | Referring Page URI (`document.referrer`) whenever available. | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page` | Recommended |
| `type` | int | Browser page type | `0` | Required |
| `title` | string | Page title DOM property | `Shopping cart page` | Recommended |
| url. Alias for [`http.url`](../../../trace/semantic_conventions/http.md) | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page`; `https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page#foo` | Required |

> 

Reviewer 4: Should we have an attribute to show the change in state that happened on soft navigation (virtual pages) like pushState and replaceState. Name can be changeState
